Use systemd Boot Assessment (#28)
openSUSE/health-checker: README.md

Check the state of a openSUSE MicroOS system after a reboot.

## Configure

> All services that should be checked, need to be listed in the 'After' section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All services that should be checked need to be listed in the 'After' section.
```

The `health-checker` script will call all plugins inside

> `/usr/local/libexec/health-checker` directory. Every plugin is responsible to

Reviewer: Should this really be `/usr/local`? That's global and not per-snapshot

Author: `health-checker` reads both `/usr/libexec/health-checker` and `/usr/local/libexec/health-checker`; though the default plugins are installed in the former. I think we can highlight that plugins can be installed in both? Though I don't really like adding files into `/usr/libexec` not managed by the package manager

Reviewer 2: Even if not snapshoted, we neeed `/usr/local/libexec/health-checker`, too. This was the clear feedback from the past. Not everybody wants to fiddle around with transactional-update to install a health-checker plugin which is not coming as RPM.
And yes, we should esplain that /usr/libexec/... is for plugins coming through an RPM and /usr/local/libexec/... for manual installation.

check a special service or condition. For this, the plugin is called with the
option *check*. If this fails, the plugin will exit with the return value `1`,
else `0`. Have a look at the default plugins shipped in

> `/usr/local/libexec/health-checker` for examples.

Reviewer: The `health-checker` package must not ship anything in `/usr/local`, it's not snapshotted.

Author: My bad, this should have been `/usr`.

The amount of times a new snapshot is rebooted before considering
it as not working is defined in `/etc/kernel/tries` (_3_ by default).

`health-checker` reboot policy can also be configured by passing the following values
as kernel arguments:

- `health-checker-reboot=force`, force health-checker to reboot the system if
  there are tries left for the current snapshot. By default, the system gets rebooted
  if the boot entry is the default one (usually the newest one).
- `health-checker-reboot=disabled`, disable the reboot when `health-checker` fails.

## How does this work?

`health-checker` assess the status of the system at the boot and act accordingly.
It uses the [Automatic Boot Assessment](https://systemd.io/AUTOMATIC_BOOT_ASSESSMENT/)
provided by systemd to check every new snapshot, to reboot a predetermined amount
of times, and then it lets the user access an emergency shell when everything
else fails.

> Every new snapshot has a separate boot entry with a boot counter (according to

Reviewer: "Every new snapshot" or just "Every snapshot"?

Author: The boot count is enabled by `kernel-install` when `/etc/kernel/tries` is set, so this only works for new snapshot. `systemd-bless-boot` will reset the counter when the new snapshot boots successfully, and it is never enabled again.

> `/etc/kernel/tries`, which defaults to 3); when that snapshot will be booted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`/etc/kernel/tries`, which defaults to 3); when that snapshot is booted
```

for the first time, the bootloader (systemd-boot by default on MicroOS, but
grub2-bls is also supported) will decrease the amount of tries left. Then if

> health-checker succeed, systemd will call `systemd-bless-boot`, which will mark

Reviewer: ```suggestion
health-checker succeeded, `systemd-bless-boot.service` runs
```

the new snapshot as working. If instead `health-checker` fails and the entry is
the default one, the system gets automatically rebooted, until the amount of

> tries equals 0. At that point an emergency shell gets opened.

Reviewer: Will it not reboot into the last working snapshot?

which should be checked by the plugins, needs to be listed in the 'After'
section, so that they are started before `health-checker`.

Its behavior depends if the system is using systemd-boot, grub2-bls or any
other bootloader following the Boot Loader Specification (BLS) or legacy.

### systemd-boot and grub2-bls

On systemd-boot and grub2-bls, when the BLS is follewed, `health-checker`
assess the status of the system at the boot and act accordingly. It uses the
[Automatic Boot Assessment](https://systemd.io/AUTOMATIC_BOOT_ASSESSMENT/)
provided by systemd to check every new snapshot, to reboot a predetermined
amount of times, and then it lets the user access an emergency shell when
everything else fails.

Every new snapshot has a separate boot entry with a boot counter (according to
`/etc/kernel/tries`, which health-checker sets to 3 by default); when that
snapshot is booted for the first time, the bootloader will decrease the amount
of tries left. Then if health-checker succeed, systemd will call
`systemd-bless-boot`, which will mark the new snapshot as working. If instead
`health-checker` fails, it will reboot the current entry until the amount of

> tries available equals 0. At that point an emergency shell gets opened.

Reviewer 3: In contrast to the man page the _README_ doesn't mention rollbacks with BLS based systems at all, it just mentions the counter and the emergency shell. Which one is correct?

Author: I have updated the description in the README. Booting a different snapshot is equivalent of doing a rollback, but this wasn't clearly explained in the README.

process.

The `health-checker` script will call several plugins. Every plugin is
responsible to check a special service or condition. All services, which should
be checked by the plugin, needs to be listed in the 'After' section. To run the
check the plugin is called with the option *check*. If this fails, the plugin
will exit with the return value `1`, else `0`. The `health-checker` script will
call all plugins inside `/usr/libexec/health-checker` and
`/usr/local/libexec/health-checker` directories. The former directory includes plugins
installed by system packages (and therefore coming through an RPM), the latter includes
plugins installed manually by the system admin. Every plugin is responsible to check
a special service or condition. For this, the plugin is called with the option

> *check*. If this fails, the plugin will exit with the return value `1`, else

Reviewer 2: The check option is already mentioned some lines above, please merge this.

Author: Fixed.

`0`. Have a look at the default plugins shipped in
`/usr/libexec/health-checker` for examples.

> Its behavior depends if the system is using systemd-boot/grub2-bls (i.e.

Reviewer 2: Better: "is using systemd-boot, grub2-bls or any other bootloader following the Boot Loader Specification (BLS) or legacy..."
I wouldn't mention bootloader internal things like the /boot/efi/loader/entries, this can change in the future and a change is already under discussion.

Author: > I wouldn't mention bootloader internal things like the /boot/efi/loader/entries, this can change in the future and a change is already under discussion.

Thanks for pointing it out Thorsten, I wasn't aware of this.

`/boot/efi/loader/entries` contains boot entries) or legacy grub (that
generates `grub.conf` by calling `grub-mkconfig`).

### systemd-boot and grub2-bls

On systemd-boot and grub2-bls, when the BLS is follewed, `health-checker`
assess the status of the system at the boot and act accordingly. It uses the
[Automatic Boot Assessment](https://systemd.io/AUTOMATIC_BOOT_ASSESSMENT/)
provided by systemd to check every new snapshot, to reboot a predetermined
amount of times, and then it lets the user access an emergency shell when
everything else fails.

Every new snapshot has a separate boot entry with a boot counter (according to
`/etc/kernel/tries`, which health-checker sets to 3 by default); when that
snapshot is booted for the first time, the bootloader (systemd-boot by

> default on MicroOS, but grub2-bls is also supported) will decrease the amount

Reviewer 2: I would remove "(systemd-boot by default on MicroOS, but grub2-bls is also supported)", not relevant internal implementation detail which can change every time. And then we forget to adjust the text here.

Author: Fixed.
